% Bit-vector is important
%
In recent years, SMT solving has emerged as a powerful technique for
testing, analysis and verification of hardware and software systems.
A wide variety of tools today use SMT solvers as part of their core
reasoning engines; examples include bounded model
checkers~\cite{hwcbmc,boolector,ebmc,cbmc}, static assertion
checkers~\cite{corral,boogie}, word-level symbolic trajectory
evaluators~\cite{wste}, constrained test
generators~\cite{crv1,crv2,dart}, concolic simulators~\cite{concolic},
among others.  A common approach used by these tools is to model the
behaviour of a system using formulas in a combination of first-order
theories, and reduce the given problem to checking the
(un)satisfiability of a formula in the combined theory.  SMT solvers
play a central role in this scheme of things, since they combine
decision procedures of individual first-order theories to check the
satisfiability of a formula in the combined theory.  Not surprisingly,
techniques to improve the performance of SMT solvers have attracted
significant attention over the years.  The literature contains a rich
body of heuristic strategies for improving the performance of
theory-specific solvers (see~\cite{barrett,deMoura2013} for excellent
expositions).  In this paper, we add to the repertoire of such
heuristics by proposing a pre-processing step that conjoins an input
formula with specially constructed assertions, without changing its
semantics. We focus on formulas in the quantifier-free theory of
fixed-width bit-vectors with multiplication, and show by means of
experiments that our pre-processing heuristic yields significant
performance benefits in many cases for three state-of-the-art SMT
solvers, namely {\zthree}~\cite{zthree}, {\cvcfour}~\cite{cvcfour} and
{\boolector}~\cite{boolector}.  Significantly, our heuristic helps
reduce the solving time for multiple examples by upto several orders
of magnitude when the input formula is unsatisfiable.

%% Theories commonly
%% supported in modern SMT solvers include the quantifier-free theories
%% of fixed-width bit-vectors, arrays, lists, strings, among
%% others~\cite{kroening-book,smtlibv2}.
%% Since reasoning in these individual theories is often much more
%% efficient than reasoning about the bit-level representation of the
%% corresponding data types, techniques based on SMT solving hold a lot
%% of promise as far as scaling to large applications is concerned.  The
%% impressive progress made in SMT solving over the last two
%% decades~\cite{smtprogress} has also substantially lived up to this
%% hope. 

The primary motivation for our work comes from word-level bounded
model checking (WBMC)~\cite{cbmc,hwcbmc} and word-level symbolic
trajectory evaluation (WSTE)~\cite{wste} of embedded hardware systems.
Specifically, we focus on systems that process data, represented as
fixed-width bit-vectors, using arithmetic operators.  Examples of such
systems include digital signal processing filters, graphics
accelerators, encryption and decryption modules, custom datapath
implementations etc.  When reasoning about these systems, it is often
necessary to check whether a high-level property, specified using
bit-vector arithmetic operators (viz. addition, multiplication,
division), is satisfied by a model of the system implementing a
data-processing algorithm.  For reasons related to performance, power,
area, ease of design etc., complex arithmetic operators with large
bit-widths are often implemented by composing several smaller, simpler
and well-characterized blocks.  For example, a $128$-bit multiplier
may be implemented using one of several multiplication algorithms,
viz. long multiplication~\cite{long}, Booth-encoded
multiplication~\cite{booth} or Wallace-tree
multiplication~\cite{wallace}, after partitioning its $128$-bit
operands into narrower, say $8$-bit wide, blocks.  SMT formulas
resulting from WBMC/WSTE of such systems are therefore likely to
contain terms with higher-level arithmetic operators (viz. $128$-bit
multiplication) encoding the specification, and terms that encode a
lower-level implementation of these operators in the system (viz. a
Wallace-tree multiplier).  Efficiently reasoning about such formulas
requires exploiting the semantic equivalence of these alternative
representations of arithmetic operators.  Unfortunately, our study,
which focuses on systems using the multiplication operator, reveals
that three state-of-the-art SMT solvers ({\zthree}, {\cvcfour} and
{\boolector}) encounter serious performance bottlenecks in identifying
these equivalences.  This manifests dramatically when reasoning about
the unsatisfiability of formulas.

\noindent {\bfseries \emph{A motivating example:}} To illustrate
the severity of the problem, we consider the SMT formula arising out
of WSTE applied to a pipelined serial multiplier circuit, originally
used as a benchmark in~\cite{wste}.  The circuit reads in two $32$-bit
operands sequentially from a single $32$-bit input port and stores
them in internal registers, before multiplying them and making the
$64$-bit result available in an output register.  The circuit also has
several control signals that can be used to change the flow of
control, effectively delaying the computation of the result.

The property to be checked asserts that if $a$ and $b$ denote the two
operands that are read in, then after the computation is over, the
output register indeed has the product $a *_{[32]} b$, where
$*_{[32]}$ denotes $32$-bit multiplication.  The RTL design
(i.e. system implementation), as used in~\cite{wste}, makes use of the
{\tt *} operator in $\sysver$, with $32$-bit operands.  The Language
Reference Manual of $\sysver$ specifies that this amounts to using a
$32$-bit multiplication operation directly.  The SMT formula resulting
from a WSTE run on this example therefore contains terms with only
$32$-bit multiplication operators, and no terms encoding a lower-level
multiplier implementation.  This formula is shown to be unsatisfiable
within a fraction of a second by {\boolector} (and also by {\cvcfour}
and {\zthree}).  Note that in WSTE (as also in WBMC), the SMT formula
encodes violation of a property by a bounded run of the system. Hence,
unsatisfiability of the formula implies the absence of any bounded
violating runs.

We now change the RTL in the above example to reflect the
implementation of $32$-bit multiplication by the long-multiplication
algorithm~\cite{long}, where each $32$-bit operand is partitioned into
$8$-bit blocks.  The corresponding WSTE run yields an SMT formula that
contains terms with $32$-bit multiplication operator (derived from the
property being checked), and also terms that encode the implementation
of a $32$-bit multiplier using long-multiplication.  Surprisingly, none
of {\boolector}, {\cvcfour} and {\zthree} succeeded in deciding the
satisfiability of the resulting formula even after $24$ hours on the
same computing platform.  The heuristic strategies in these solvers
failed to identify the semantic equivalence of terms encoding
alternative representations of $32$-bit multiplication, and proceeded
to bit-blast the formulas, leading to this dramatic run-time blowup.

\noindent {\bfseries \emph{Problem formulation:}} 
The above example demonstrates that the inability to identify semantic
equivalence of alternative representations of arithmetic operators
plagues multiple state-of-the-art SMT solvers.  Therefore, a heuristic
that helps in this respect and is generic (not solver-specific) would
be highly desirable.  This motivates us to ask: \emph{Can we
pre-process an SMT formula containing terms encoding alternative
representations of bit-vector arithmetic operators, in a
solver-independent manner, so that multiple solvers benefit from it?}
We answer this question positively in this paper for the
multiplication operator.  Note, however, that like all heuristics, we
cannot guarantee that our pre-processing step helps in every case.
The motivating example, that originally timed out after $24$ hours on
three solvers, is shown to be unsatisfiable by {\zthree} in 0.073s and
by {\cvcfour} in 0.017s, after application of our heuristic. However,
{\boolector} does not benefit from our heuristic in this example.
Nevertheless, there are several other examples where {\boolector}
benefits significantly, as discussed in Section~\ref{sec:experiments}.

\noindent {\bfseries \emph{Term re-writing vs adding tautological assertions:}} 
Prima facie, the above problem can be solved by reverse-engineering
the lower-level implementation of a bit-vector arithmetic operator,
and by re-writing terms encoding the lower-level implementation with
terms using the bit-vector operator.  Indeed, variants of this
approach have been used by earlier researchers in different
contexts~\cite{kunz,ciesielski,kolbl,reveng,earlier-pat-match-synopsys}.
In the context of SMT solving, however, complications can potentially
arise if we simply re-write a term encoding one representation of an
arithmetic operator by another term encoding a different
representation of the same operator. For example, as shown in Example
$2$ of Section~\ref{sec:long-mult}, the same collection of
sums-of-partial-products arising from long-multiplication can be
obtained from two different bit-vector multiplication operations.
This makes it difficult to determine which term re-writes should be
used to help the SMT solver decide the satisfiability of the input
formula.  Furthermore, even if we are able to uniquely identify the
equivalence of two terms representing the same arithmetic operation,
re-writing one term with another may not correlate with improved solver
performance for various reasons.  Indeed, re-writing one term by
another is a ``peep-hole'' transformation that is oblivious of the
overall context in which the terms appear in the SMT formula.  What
appears beneficial locally may not be beneficial in the overall
(un)satisfiability check.  In addition, syntactially distinct terms
that are semantically equivalent may play different roles when
reasoning about different sub-formulas of an SMT formula.  For
example, one term may enable a re-write rule that helps simplify one
sub-formula, while a syntactically distinct but semantically
equivalent term may enable another re-write rule that helps simplify
another sub-formula. Re-writing one term by another precludes the
possibility of both terms contributing to improving the performance of
the overall satisfiability check.

Thus, re-writing a term encoding a specific implementation of a
bit-vector arithmetic operator with another term encoding another
implementation of the operator may not help in all cases.  In this
paper, we present a heuristic alternative to address the above
problem, focusing only on bit-vector multiplication.  Given a
bit-vector formula $\varphi$ that contains terms with two different
representations of bit-vector multiplication, our heuristic searches
for patterns corresponding to two multiplication algorithms (long
multiplication and Wallace-tree multiplication) in the terms. Instead
of re-writing the matched sub-terms directly, as has been done in
earlier work, we conjoin the formula $\varphi$ with additional
assertions that equate a matched sub-term with the corresponding
bit-vector arithmetic operator.  Note that each added assertion is a
tautology, and hence does not change the semantics of the formula.
Significantly, since no re-writes are done, we can express multiple
semantic equivalences without removing any syntactic term from the
formula.  This is an important departure from earlier techniques, such
as~\cite{kolbl}, that rely on sophisticated re-writes of the
formula. Our experiments show that the added tautological assertions
succeed in preventing bit-blasting in several cases, while in other
cases they help in pruning the search space even after bit-blasting.
Both effects eventually translate to improved performance of the SMT
solver.  Since our heuristic simply pre-processes the input formula by
adding assertions, it is independent of the internals of any specific
solver, and can be used with multiple solvers.  Our experiments show
that the performance of different SMT solvers on the pre-processed
formulas can vary.  Hence, we propose a portfolio approach to solving
the pre-processed formulas.  We show experimentally that a portfolio
solver using pre-processed formulas significantly outperforms a
portfolio solver using the original formulas.



%% Many hardware and software verification problems are translated to the
%% satisfiability of quantifier free bit-vector(QF\_BV)
%% formulas~\cite{hardware,cbmc,more}.
%
